# The microcirculation, the blood-brain barrier, and the neurovascular unit in health and Alzheimer disease: The aberrant pericyte is a central player

- **Cite key**: Div25
- **Authors**: Y. Divecha; S. Rampes; Sabine Tromp; S. Boyanova; Alice L Fleckney; Mehmet Fidanboylu; S. Thomas
- **Year**: 2025  (2025-03-01)
- **Journal**: Pharmacological Reviews
- **DOI**: 10.1016/j.pharmr.2025.100052
- **URL**: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmr.2025.100052
- **Citations**: 42 (31.2/yr)

## Abstract

High fidelity neuronal signaling is enabled by a stable local microenvironment. A high degree of homeostatic regulation of the brain microenvironment, and its separation from the variable and potentially neurotoxic contents of the blood, is brought about by the central nervous system barriers. Evidence from clinical and preclinical studies implicates brain microcirculation, cerebral hypoperfusion, blood–brain barrier dysfunction, and reduced amyloid clearance in Alzheimer pathophysiology. Studying this dysregulation is key to understanding Alzheimer disease (AD), identifying drug targets, developing treatment strategies, and improving prescribing to this vulnerable population. This review has 2 parts: part 1 describes the cerebral microcirculation, cerebral blood flow, extracellular fluid drainage, and the neurovascular unit components with an emphasis on the blood-brain barrier, and part 2 summarizes how each aspect is altered in AD. Discussing the neurovascular unit structures separately allows us to conclude that aberrant pericytes are an early contributor and central to understanding AD pathophysiology. Pericytes have multiple functions including maintenance of blood-brain barrier integrity and the control of capillary blood flow, capillary stalling, neurovascular coupling, intramural periarterial drainage, glia-lymphatic (glymphatic) drainage, and consequently amyloid and tau clearance. Pericytes are vasoactive, express cholinergic and adrenergic receptors, and exhibit apolipoprotein E isoform–specific transport pathways. Hypoperfusion in AD is linked to a pericyte-mediated response. Deficient endothelial cell–pericyte (PDGBB-PDGFRβ) signaling loops cause pericyte dysfunction, which contributes and even initiates AD degeneration. We conclude that pericytes are central to understanding AD pathophysiology, are an interesting therapeutic target in AD, and have an emerging role in regenerative therapy. Significance Statement Dysregulation and dysfunction of the neurovascular unit and fluid circulation (including blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and interstitial fluid) occurs in Alzheimer disease. A central player is the aberrant pericyte. This has fundamental implications to understanding disease pathophysiology and the development of therapies.
