# PLASMA-CYCLEGAN: PLASMA BIOMARKER-GUIDED MRI TO PET CROSS-MODALITY TRANSLATION USING CONDITIONAL CYCLEGAN

- **Cite key**: Che25g
- **Authors**: Yanxi Chen; Yindan Su; Celine Dumitrascu; Kewei Chen; D. Weidman; Richard J. Caselli; Nicholas Ashton; E. Reiman; Yalin Wang
- **Year**: 2025  (2025-01-04)
- **Journal**: Proceedings. IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging
- **DOI**: 10.1109/ISBI60581.2025.10980900
- **URL**: https://doi.org/10.1109/ISBI60581.2025.10980900
- **Citations**: 4 (2.7/yr)

## Abstract

Cross-modality translation between MRI and PET imaging is challenging due to the distinct mechanisms underlying these modalities. Blood-based biomarkers (BBBMs) are revolutionizing Alzheimer's disease (AD) detection by identifying patients and quantifying brain amyloid levels. However, the potential of BBBMs to enhance PET image synthesis remains unexplored. In this paper, we performed a thorough study on the effect of incorporating BBBM into deep generative models. By evaluating three widely used cross-modality translation models, we found that BBBMs integration consistently enhances the generative quality across all models. By visual inspection of the generated results, we observed that PET images generated by CycleGAN exhibit the best visual fidelity. Based on these findings, we propose Plasma-CycleGAN, a novel generative model based on CycleGAN, to synthesize PET images from MRI using BBBMs as conditions. This is the first approach to integrate BBBMs in conditional cross-modality translation between MRI and PET.
